mimetics
memes are ideas that survive
this is an entirely independent feature
of an idea to its truth an idea can be
more or less true and yet still survive
it can be more or less useful to its
holder and yet to survive
some ideas specifically some memes can
cause in their holders behaviors which
actually are detrimental to their
holders and can actively work against
them frustrating their capacity to solve
their own problems mimetics is the
scientific study of memes memes are
important to understand both in terms of
individual psychology as well as in
sociology the understanding of how human
society at the level of relationships
and institutions works and can evolve
over time but the study of memes is
still not taken as seriously as it might
be in either psychology or sociology and
yet it is a large part of the story if
not the entire story
psychology has traditionally been
defined as the study of the human mind
and behavior but rather a lot of
behaviour happens because of the memes
in the mind of a person so it is
impossible to have a good fundamental
explanation of human psychology while
completely ignoring what we know so far
about memes so what do we know following
the insights of david deutsch as laid
out in chapter 15 of the beginning of
infinity and in brief we know memes can
be divided into two broad categories
being memes they both tend to get
themselves copied the defining
characteristic of a meme but the
mechanism by which they get replicated
is different a rational meme relies on
the recipient's critical faculties to
get itself replicated so for example
good scientific explanations such as
those contained in the field of
thermodynamics tend to get passed from
person to person generation after
generation because those theories solve
problems it is rational for people to
want better engines and ways to more
efficiently produce electricity and so
on it is rational for people to want to
solve their problems make progress and
improve so the laws of thermodynamics
constitute a set of rational means they
get copied because they solve problems
and allow for more progress to be made
so people want to learn those ideas and
pass them on on the other hand
anti-rational memes tend to get
themselves copied not because they are
useful to the recipient but the opposite
they are defined by their ability to
disable the recipient's critical
faculties for example a meme that says a
particular book is perfect and should
never be criticized lest one who does
will be cast into eternal fire could be
a powerful meme that tends to get copied
generation after generation but not
because it is necessarily helping the
holder solve more problems
indeed the very idea that it cannot be
criticized means it cannot be improved
and it can also instill the general
sense that sometimes criticism is a bad
thing more broadly so we have to be
especially cautious with it we all have
fears concerns phobias and other ways in
which we might put up with something
that is actually doing us no good
because we have anti-rational memes in
our minds a good psychologist counselor
or psychiatrist even one unfamiliar with
the theory of memes will nonetheless be
all about trying to identify some of
those anti-rational memes the recipient
does not even realize they are holding
on to they will just use different
terminology for how they go about
finding out what the stumbling block is
so that a solution can be found and
progress made at the level of a society
sociologically speaking
some memes that survive actively help to
stabilize a society which undergoes
rapid change one such would be the
constitutional monarchy that exists in
the united kingdom and the nations of
the commonwealth this meme or even meme
plex which we call the institution of
the british monarchy has benefited the
society in which it is found and to some
extent contributes to the definition of
british culture itself when a culture is
broadly speaking dominated by rational
memes we can call it a dynamic society
the tradition of criticism that typifies
the enlightenment and nations that
follow in the western cultural tradition
share a set of memes that broadly
speaking encourage and value criticism
of everything and in all directions more
or less a culture is deutsche writes a
set of ideas that cause their holder to
behave alike in certain ways in the west
this can manifest itself as a general
rebellious type nature more so than in
places that tend to reject such a
tradition of criticism in other words in
the west the culture is that we behave
alike by valuing individuality valuing
difference or in modern parlance
diversity and diversity of ideas ideally
but in a society that is dominated by
anti-rational means progress is not so
fast it slows almost to a standstill we
call such a place a static society
almost all of human history is a story
of static societies that from the
perspective of any individual almost
nothing was seen to ever change in the
society
all the time from when they were a child
until whenever they became old if they
ever got that thought progress is slow
in a static society because people are
rewarded not by criticizing the existing
ideas and authorities but rather by
enacting the memes ever more faithfully
in such a society rewards come by being
more faithful adherence to the
authorities and to the existing ideas
and standards punishments are dished out
to those who rebel and show
individuality unlike in a dynamic
society where iconoclastic artists
scientists leaders innovators and
entrepreneurs are more successful when
their more unique ideas win in the
marketplace of new ideas though no
society is perfectly static or perfectly
dynamic and all societies must contain a
mix of rational and antirational means
today we can see in which directions
which societies that remain tend as
individuals we are not ourselves always
aware even if we live in a dynamic
society how we might nevertheless be
held hostage by some anti-rational memes
for there will always be many of those
in explicit perhaps ideas we are unable
to put into words but cause us to engage
in behaviors only because our critical
faculties have been disabled we could
understand all of this far better if
more progress was made in mimetics